---
id: 4418
title: What is a 100-year flood?
date: 2016-09-02T19:02:48-04:00
author: James Howard
layout: post
guid: https://jameshoward.us/?p=4418
permalink: /2016/09/02/100-year-flood/
dsq_thread_id:
  - "5115302046"
featured-image: what-is-a-100-year-flood.jpg
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - Earth science
  - environmental policy
  - environmental science
  - environmental studies
  - flood studies
  - Howard County
  - mathematics
  - statistics
  - weather
---
Last night, Mary Catherine Cochran, executive director of the
[Patapsco Heritage Greenway](http://patapscoheritagegreenway.org/),
asked some very insightful questions about [my analysis of flooding
in Ellicott
City](/2016/08/09/statistical-likelihood-extreme-events-ellicott-city-floods):

{% include fbembed.html url="https://www.facebook.com/howardjp/posts/601279356432" %}

These questions are worth going into some detail, so let me begin
by discussing first, how I account for changing statistics.  The
answer is, I don't, but that doesn't matter.  The how is interesting,
but the why is critical to understanding both severe storms and
rare events.

There's
a common misconception that the "100-year flood" is what happens
whenever any flood event happens.  You often hear any flood described
as a 100-year flood, but that's just not right.  The 100-year flood
is defined as when the water reaches a level defined as the 1 percent
AEP level in a given area.  The 1 percent AEP level is a level where
the water is only likely to reach that level with a 1 in 100
probability, in any given year.  The problem, that definition is
fairly confusing.  So let's explain it like this.

There's water everywhere, mostly.  It just might be fairly deep
into the ground before you hit it.  When water comes, from rain or
a swelling river, the ground can absorb _some_ of it as the underground
level goes up.  Eventually, it reaches the surface and you have
surface flooding, though it probably hit your basement first.  It's
rather counter intuitive, but it is crystal clear if you think about
a nice day at the beach.

As the tide goes in and out, the base water level changes.  There
is some part of the beach which is always covered in water.  You
normally call this the ocean.  There is some part which will stay
dry all day, and you put your towel and chair there.  And there is
an area in between where the water splashes over and over as the
day goes on.  Following so far?  So in between, there is a place
that is covered with water _most_ of the time and a place that is
uncovered _most_ of the time.  And between those two places, there
is some point where there the ground is covered with water exactly
half the time [1.  This may or may not be intuitive, but it is
easily [provable using
calculus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intermediate_value_theorem).
Remember that the next time you hear someone ask when they will use
math ever.].  Following along, over the course of a single day,
there is some point which will be covered by water only 1 percent
of the day, for 14 minutes and 24 seconds.  We might call the water
level here the 1 percent daily exceedance point.  Any point closer,
or downhill, to the water from this point, is going to see water
more than 1 percent of the day.  Any point farther, or uphill, will
not.  That point is the demarcation line of the 100-minute floodplain.

Now, let's consider this over much larger timespans, like centuries.
Over long periods of time, there will be a much larger variance in
the maximum point, and possibly the minimum point, pushing the both
the maximum, and the 1 percent (over the period) point inland.  No
problem, the 1 percent point moves based on the timespan given.
The 100-year timespan was selected in the 1960s for use in creating
the [National Flood Insurance
Program](https://www.fema.gov/national-flood-insurance-program).
But it does not refer to getting a flood every 100 years and certainly
not only every 100 years.

It is really about finding the level which
is the 1 percent exceedance probability level on an annual basis.
If that point is above ground, you're on the floodplain.  Actually,
you're on the 100-year floodplain.  See, everywhere is floodplain
at the right timespan.  Even on top of a mountain, there's a 1
percent probability line.  It is just probably quite far below you.

So, back to the question of _changing_ probabilities, I ducked the
problem completely.  By sticking to a 100-year event probabilities,
rather than flood levels, I could set aside the changing conditions.
Even if higher floods are happening more frequently, a 100-year
event has the same probability of occurring.  It's just worse when
it does.  And lesser events are also worse.  Because of this, the
statistical probabilities I gave are the same, because the underlying
definitions are flexible.  If, instead, we fixed the water level
and asked again, the analysis changes substantially.  We'll look
at that, next.

_Image by [Mattinbgn / Wikimedia
Commons](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Rochester_Flood_Markers.JPG)._
